---
layout: post
title: "Lessons from Each Yale Semester (Part 2)"
author: "Linh Le"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,yale]

---
The first part of these series took way longer than I thought. I owe it to my ability to pick up unimportant details really effectively; perhaps I should work more on the retention of actual valuable information. The saga continues after I had a very enlightening winter break, by which I mean I got to go home and ascertain just how much I missed being on campus within one short stint of returning to where I had exclusively lived.

<h3>ECON 121: Intermediate Microeconomics</h3>
Another oft-considered milestone of the Global Affairs major is the completion of Intermediate Microeconomics. At this point of Yale, I have pretty much settled on my preference of Global Affairs over Ethics, Politics, & Economics. Knowing that I will complete a STEM-heavy major (somewhat due to OPT extension policy), I looked to this other major as more of a practically oriented foray into social design questions I have long loved. Even with EP&E, I would still have to complete ECON 121. Picking this class seemed like a sensible choice.

Except it could have been an impermissible choice. At Yale, AP, SAT Subject Test, or IB results do not let you waive any requirements; they sometimes allow you to take a higher-level class. For ECON, everyone is required to follow the exact sequence of Introductory Microeconomics > Intermediate Microeconomics or Introductory Macroeconomics > Intermediate Macroeconomics. These four classes, along with other intro-level ECON classes at Yale, follow a very rigid curve of 1/6 A, 1/3 A-, 1/3 B+, and 1/6 B, especially because they assign people who drop the course to the B-/C tail of the curve to protect those that stuck with the course. This was especially challenging in the Introductory sequence, when tales of people getting 99 and an A- were rumored because the material was not challenging enough and too many people earned extra credits.

I was egged on to try Intermediate Microeconomics by Joon, who at this point was also hooked on the idea that prerequisites at Yale are almost never strictly enforced. I coyly showed up to a 200-person lecture hall, situated in the thematic Whitney Humanities Center that later characterized both Joon's and my second semester, and sat down amid a sea of people whose major could be anywhere between Math to Sociology (or both). I remember coming up to Professor Chalioti and asking if I am even allowed to take the class. She asked me, <em>'Are you confident in math?'</em> I just said yes. She said then I could take it.

It was also fortunate for me that I was not in attendance for the second lecture. Every semester, Yale classes would commence on Wednesdays, but then the Monday classes in the subsequent week would be cancelled. They would then require students and professors to conduct Monday class schedules on that one Friday in the middle, and cancelled Friday classes. However, this Friday in the spring semester is canonically the second day of YMUN conference, for which all Secretariat members would be asked to not attend unless they would be penalized for lack of participation (i.e., unless these classes were seminars). Intermediate Microeconomics was not. It also traditionally hosted a weed-out class on its second lecture, where the professor would just dump all the math that there is to learn in the course in one slideshow, to the dismay of at least half the class and prompting at least one-eighth to drop on the spot. I do not know if I would have stayed had I attended this lecture. Many of the faces that I were familiar with in the first lecture did in fact drop.

Intermediate Microeconomics marked one of the first classes that I learned a concept before the course that is supposed to introduce it to me taught me. This time it is the technique of constraint optimization, which Multivariable Calculus only brought up after the first midterm. The course could be summarized in terms of applying computation to economics concepts that people would have learned in the introductory equivalent, encoding them in formulas like the Slutsky equation. I was not too peeved with the mathematical evolution of the class, but I did not anticipate that the vocal majority of the course would be. In my opinion, Professor Chalioti placed a heavier emphasis on the graphical interpretations of economic solutions. This hypothesis was vindicated when I later tutored for a different Professor, who was way more mathematically rigorous in her problem sets.

My work buddy in this class was Brian Cho, who lived on the fifth floor of the C entryway in Vandy in a mixed-gender suite; through Brian I also met Philena, who at this point was an honorary Branford resident. The marginal reduction in course anxiety brought on by having friends taking the same class is no difference here than elsewhere, but the stroke of luck I hit was when we discovered we were the three of the eight people with a perfect score on the first midterm. Not only did this cure me of all the imposterdom I had, but it also created a funny tale between me and Joon when he took the class in the subsequent semester.

The biggest takeaways from ECON 121 were about the optimization problem that could rationalize many individual behavior, the economic arguments related to insurance, and how tiered pricing worked. It was one of the classes that I prided myself on mastering its material the most, and I proceeded to peer tutor for it the most times, until my penultimate semester.

<h3>SOCY 170: Contesting Injustice</h3>
Knowing that I was interested in learning Italian in the summer as part of my language requirements, I was on a sprint to find a suitable Writing credit. I had previously shopped an ENGL 114 seminar, and felt really uncomfortable with the idea of being critiqued for my writing style instead of my content. This is not to say that there is no merit to the former, but I sought feedback that did not so obviously disengage my points from their mechanical delivery. My principle became to take Writing classes from the departments whose fields are also of my practical interest (Political Science, Sociology, even Environmental Science): if a political scientist do not buy my argument, then I am fully convinced to change.

The issue was that this greatly limited the options available to me as a first-year. I was at the bottom of any priority lists for class enrollment, while I was already picky about the course topics. One of my friends recommended me look into a class he took that had an optional writing credit; it turned out the class, "Moral Foundations of Politics", or MoFoPo, was the one I already self-studied on Coursera and even wrote it into my Why Yale essay. But the other option in the PLSC department was Contesting Injustice, and it felt like an acceptable compromise.

The class seated neatly within a Watson Hall lecture room, with more Teaching Assistants than I felt necessary. The professor was a stern but calming figure, who was very passionate about the topic of instruction (that is, a theoretical underpinning of her corpus on El Salvadorian protests). It harkened back to the Marxist overtones of my Vietnamese education, highlighting the class struggles and revolutionary tactics that safeguarded the indigenous communities of Central America. But it also confronted me with two components of class realities that previous dialectical readings failed to satiate me with. First was the role of religion. Liberation theology was an essential catalytical factor in the progression of El Salvadorian grassroots movement, creating ideological unity and invoking emotional responses to repression across a large base of the population. Conversely, it was arguably the French Christian missionaries that sought to evangelize Cochinchina that initiated the rift between the Vietnamese North and South, with the victorious Tonkin rooted in historical Buddhist, Confucian, and Taoist teachings. There necessitates my admission that if the goal is to organize and mobilize, then a materialist understanding of the community is cannot adequately capture its characteristics. Church was also instrumental in many liberation movements in the US mid-20th century, and could be used as a tenable cross-class space that holds all mortality in the smae lighting. The method of movement cannot be rigidly applied from its theory--which brings me to my next lesson, that change can start small and creatively. My fondest memory of the class is when I succeeded in writing about how sound is used within the protestors' toolkit in South Korea, evidencing a video of Ewha Womans University students chanting <em>Into the New World</em> in light of the presidential scandal. Power can and should be understood with the contextual nuance and flexibility, especially if you are more concerned with longtermist goals than a military commander-in-chief.

The final assignment of this course culminated in an eyebrow-raising tale I am surprised has not recurred in my life. I discovered that I have a tendency to [dry heave](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Retching) whenever stressed. It could be before a badminton match; it most frequently is in anticipation of an exam. The point is that I became so perniciously concerned with how prepared I am for a test that my body involuntarily makes unprompted gagging noises. I first noticed this in grade 9, and had already become inured to instances of retching by college. I never actually vomitted, but I would sound pretty convincing. Except for maybe two of my high school friends and my parents, no fellow test-takers had eyed at me scrupulously or complained to me, so I felt pretty confident about keeping this habit to myself as I worked through solving its root causes.

Imagine the scene. It was the last week of classes, by whose end all classes must have finished all instructional activities to leave room for reading week and finals. On Monday, I came down with a debilitating fever, incessant coughing, and no ability to stay alert for more than two hours. Yale Health could not figure out what exactly I had, so they sent me away to rest with a doctor's note to my Dean allowing me to ask for extensions at professors' discretion. I had two pseudo-finals within the week: one for this class on Wednesday, and one for Orgo Lab on Friday. As member of the Writing section, I was only required to sit the 35-minute multiple-choice component of the exam. The professor seemed reluctant to administer a make-up exam past that Friday lest such event should interfere with college policies, so she asked if I could take the test an hour before my Friday lab practical. I said yes. I felt better<em>-ish</em> by Thursday, and to ensure my odds I took Tylenol an hour before my test.

What I had forgotten were the dry-heaving demons, my inner saboteurs, that conjured as I sat down waiting for my proctor's forewords. He informed me that he had printed out a wrong copy, so he excused himself for five minutes. A brewing sensation of angst-ridden dread overtook my stomach: I had forgotten to eat before drinking Tylenol, and I started dry-heaving a bit too realistically. I dashed out of the testing room, there seated another student also in need of a make-up exam, and did not return until I had actually coughed up whatever left in my stomach. My brief descriptions of what just happened, however, sounded alarming to the proctoring graduate student, who probably worried that the teaching staff was pushing me to sit this exam a bit too far just for their convenience, enough that he told me to take as much time as I needed, find another room for myself, and inform the professor who wasted no time to ask if I felt physically well enough to continue. The truth is that that exam was on the easier side, and I had already felt confident about the other 92.5% of the grade. I had to leave on time for my next exam anyway, more embittered about the fact that I could no longer claim that I never wet-heaved than the context of the exam itself.

<h3>CHEM 223L: Organic Chemistry Lab II</h3>

<h3>CHEM 175: First-year Organic Chemistry II</h3>

<h3>MATH 120: Multivariable Calculus</h3>

<h3>International Relations Symposium at Yale</h3>
Dropping class

<h3>Vanderbilt C32</h3>

<h3>Yale Movement: Ddu-du Ddu-du</h3>

<h3>Ending Notes</h3>
