---
layout: post
title: "Nobel Prize"
author: "Linh Le"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,random]

---
When I was making school visits as part of their complimentary PhD admission, one of my peers asked a professor:

"What is the ultimate goal of your professorship? Is it to win a Nobel Prize?"

I remember giggling, in my mind, a bit. First, the concept of an end goal with regards to research feels antithetical to the virtues of the profession. School, for people who have made their way to the near highest levels of academia, probably feels partly like a competitive game that they have emerged victorious, and the noble and novel challenges of research involve escaping the mentality of being graded. Doctoral studies are supposed to be at the forefront of science--who is there to judge? We have to wit, without the authority figures presiding over whether our work is considered better than others, let alone <em>the best</em>, the ways with which we choose to let the merits of our innovation speak. Second, the Nobel Prize is not time immemorial. It is rather young compared to when humanity started accomplishing impressive revolutionary ambitions, so for a career that is motivated by its legacy way further than most available professions on the job market (read: one really has to not be in it for the money to spend time pursuing tenure) to be confined in its scope to a prize feels a bit out of alignment with conventional academic progression. Third, it almost posits the notion that there are Nobel-grade accomplishments, that academics can optimize their odds of pulling a Nobel prize through a combination of research locus, foundational potential, and scholastic prominence. Fourth, almost all Nobel prize winners of the sciences win past their academic heydays. I would assume that the impact of most of their works has been felt much more extensively before the Nobel committee doles out their recognition. Fifth, and most importantly, engineering disciplines seldom get Nobel Prizes. This was the main reason that led me to react the way I did.

I did not really remember how the professor reacted. I would think that they tried to refute such notion of academic foresight, like how declaring so would jinx their prospects, or something along the lines of my fourth reason. My realization after talking to an abundance of professors is that everyone believes in their research, as they should. Within the crop of PhD graduates, only a few so aspire to the dedication to the fundamentals of science that they would root themselves in academia.