---
layout: post
title: "Top Ten K-Pop Debuts"
author: "Linh Le"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,music]

---
Two of my most favorite activities in college are ranking random things and listening to Korean Pop music. While the industry has become rather supersaturated with aspiring groups with slightly different aesthetic variants, debuts mark an emotional milestone for all trainees that were once inspired by the multi-talented cohort of idols that struggled to superstardom. I want to chime in my thoughts with regards to the best ten debut songs, taking into account their musical and lyrical composition, artistic value, innovation among contemporaries, replayability (spoiler alert), and to a lesser extent longevity. I will not be considering subunit debut (e.g., Girls' Generation-TTS), solo debut when the group is currently active (e.g., Kai for EXO), and My main knowledge of K-Pop belongs to the second and third generation, which means that I have a lot less knowledge of the more recent debuts. If you feel like there is a debut song that can rival these ten, let me know (somehow)!

10. [Free Somebody - Luna](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lpwG8f9nt4s)
I am implicating myself in technical phraseology early on--by the time Luna debuted as a solo artist, f(x) had been earmarked for permanent hiatus, with the last comeback being a full year earlier and only one more song as an SM Station (meaning no promotional materials in conjunction). At this point, Luna has proven herself to be the gifted yet forgotten middle child of SM Entertainment. Auditioning as a dancer yet in possession of a highly skilled vocal prowess (arguably with more support than Taeyeon) from a clasically trained musical family, the twin sister chose the glamorous life of a pop idol. While well-poised within f(x)'s critical success (their second studio album, Pink Tape, was ranked by Billboard as the greatest K-Pop album of the 2010s), f(x)'s experimental techno-music garnered limited commercial success compared to their elders, Girls' Generation. f(x)'s internal crises also struck at the time when SM's next project, Red Velvet, was already in the making. Solo directions were apt, given that one member was a foreign national of a country that South Korea was in a trade war with, another withdrew for personal reason, and one more (out of three remaining) was the sister of Girls' Generation now-estranged 9th member.

Free Somebody feels like a personal project, as it contains the multitudes of aspirations and showcases the unlimited talents that Luna has relentlessly sought to convey. The music video leverages her dancing skills in a hallucinogenic experience, representative of the starting lyrics ("오감의 끝이 몽환에 젖어 / 이 모든 감각 일어나는 그 곳에": "The tips of the five senses are soaked in fantasy / where all these senses are happening"). Luna's voice projects, maintaining a strong grit as she goes up the register along the chorus. Much like f(x)'s pioneering works, Luna's debut track does not feel like it tries catering to a public audience that enjoys a well-defined female trope. Instead, it is her authenticity that shines through the multicolored media of artistic expressions and reminds us of her profound perspectives.

9. [Face - NU'EST](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gyXy0m-4bvE)
NU'EST made their first official appearance in 2012, at the apex of boy group grunge that Big Bang, BEAST, or at times Super Junior has perfected. To be honest, I was also a severely lovelorn admirer of this batch of boybands. With hair covering one eye (if not both) and bandanas strewn across imported streetwear, they grow in popularity to influence the likes of EXO, BTS, and of course NU'EST. The group entertained moderate success, rising early on in their career yet struggling to break through, even with participation on the Produce series with competition of a much younger age. The group disbanded earlier this year, not without snatching some achievement awards a few months prior.

Inasmuch as the senior groups to NU'EST heavily inspired their style, none really had a debut track at the same level. It seems like the producers behind the group paid attention to the pop-rock-punk intersections that had worked wonders among the Korean/East Asian public, risked it for their new group entrance, and was rewarded. Even the sprinkling of English words in their hooks ("터져 나오는 Jackpot / 누가 뭐라 건 so what": "The bursting out jackpot / no matter what anyone says, so what") conjures up the heart-wrenching ante-elopement teenage love story that is exactly what was all the rage at that time.

8. ELEVEN - I'VE
This is unsurprising to anyone who knows me in real life. I have harped on about how incredible of a song ELEVEN is to a point where I started being associated with the song to several of my friends. There are many reasons for me to enjoy the song. The fourth generation of K-Pop has signaled its onset with a combination of third-generation bands like BTS and BLACKPINK at their international peak, talent-show contract groups coming to a permanent end, and a new crop of Big Four group debuts. Most of the new idols are younger than me. For someone who has lost interest in staying abreast of all of K-Pop, I needed something clean, quality, and reminiscent of something I have liked. Pre-debut I'VE lineup stirred many a concern for netizens, given that two of their members are also two of the most popular members of the recently disbanded IZ*ONE. I agree: highlighting the two more experienced stars would be a safe move, but I wanted to see how their identity could thrive beyond the post-PRODUCE tag.

I was not disappointed in the slightest. I remember anticipating the comeback, but I forgot about it the day of, as I was preparing my graduate school applications. On my bus from Boston to New Haven, I scurried to pre-save some songs and realized that I was three days behind the I'VE debut. Trying to fathom the intensity of the music video while on spotty wi-fi in the middle of Massachussets was almost a religious awakening; I questioned what I was hearing and why I liked it, so much so that I had spent a quarter of my data for that month just by watching performance videos of ELEVEN. From the jaw-dropping slowmo "난 몰랐어 내 맘이 이리 다채로운지" (I didn’t know my heart was so colorful) to the hip-thrust accompanying "Ain't no one, two, three, four, five, six, seven", the song was tight, refreshing, and daring in its comprehensive portrayal of the girls' charisma, identity, and synchronicity. Wonyoung and Yujin both matured substantially, which served as a comforting reminder that the group possessed immense potential right at the start of their career.

7. La Vie En Rose - IZ*ONE
Following the success of I.O.I and Wanna One from the first two seasons of PRODUCE, the third iteration welcomed a twist: introducing Japanese idols from the AKB48 scene as part of the once exclusively Korean lineup. Though both prioritize fan service, Korean idols come under much more scrutiny when it comes to their singing, dancing, and somewhat rapping talents. They undergo intensive training periods and are expected to present impressive performance qualities upon debut, even as teenagers. On the contrary, AKB48 and their sister groups are simply doted on for their personality. They have songs with singing and dancing component, but the level of perfection is way less compared to the rigor of K-Pop. Instead, fans root for their energy, progress, and variety show engagement, if not appearance. Successful graduates of the AKB system are younger compared to K-idols of the same recognition; what they lack in raw skills are made up for with their ability to draw in supporters.

At this point, we have concluded the heavy-handed rigging involved in the results of PRODUCE 48. The 1/4 Japanese membership could have easily doubled were it not for the show to cater to a primarily Korean audience, seeing that the J-idols were in fact outshining several top 12 Korean trainees in popularity rankings--the only metric that supposedly mattered. However intentionally harmful were these manipulations are up for debate, but the group, compared to their predecessors, was engineered to be more about the group as a whole and less about talented individuals. The results were that IZ*ONE is much more commercially successful when they were active, with no misses among all five Korean title tracks but especially their first post-show appearance. La Vie En Rose set the bar high with their elegant motif meshed well with hard-hitting beats, especially at the mesmerizing pre-chorus ("더 깊어진 눈빛 그 속에 붉어진 / 내 맘을 타오르게 해 나를 춤추게 해": "Your deepened eyes / make my heart red and burn, they make me dance"). At this time K-Pop has not seen too many anti-drops, and La Vie En Rose happened to execute them well in their chorus. At one of their MAMA performances, the dance break remix proved the song's modern production that was foundational to the group's branding success.

6. MAMA - EXO
K-Pop enjoyers now sulk at the confusing metaverse of Kwangya, but the ideas for paranormal world-building have germinated in Lee Soo Man et al.'s playbook for eternity. The loudest manifestation pre-aespa goes to EXO, or, as 2011 fans recalled, EXO-K and EXO-M. 

5. BOOMBAYAH / Whistle - BLACKPINK

4. Replay - SHINee

3. Love Sick - FTIsland

2. Bad Girl, Good Girl - missA

1. Into The New World - Girls' Generation