---
layout: post
title: "Test of English as a Foreign Language"
author: "Linh Le"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,random]

---
As an international student applying to a college in the United States, in addition doing everything that domestic students would have to do, I had to prove my proficiency in the English language. Such proof comes in many forms, but as my high school was taught entirely in Vietnamese, my only option was through standardized testing. There are two main tests. IELTS stands for the International English Language Testing System, scored out of 9 with 0.5 increments, and based off of the British classification system of proficiency. TOEFL, the one I opted for, is abbreviated from the title of this blog entry, scored in natural numbers up to 120, and is assumed to be preferable because of its affiliation with College Board.

While functionally equivalent, the two tests test for different skills. IELTS aims at academic usage of the English language, embedded in the way the notorious Task 1 essay of the Writing portion asks people to describe a diagram with formal language, or how the Speaking section is quasi-argumentative. TOEFL, on the other hand, emphasizes heavily on everyday contexts of language use. In the Listening section you are only allowed one time to listen and answer a series of undisclosed questions; in the Writing section, writing concisely is rewarded as grading is based on penalizing mistakes. With subtle discrepancies, the distribution of test results varies, especially for Vietnamese students. It is relatively more straightforward to get to 7.5 or 8.0 out of 9.0 in IELTS through simply mimicking writing samples or practicing patterns of speech; getting a perfect IELTS score is almost impossible to train for. Alternatively, preparation for TOEFL boils down to acquainting oneself with the testing format. Getting to three digits of TOEFL score correlates with a significant increase in the comfort of socializing in the English language; scores between 110 and 120 are indistinguishable from one another.

I take a lot of pride in the distinction of English as a Foreign Language from English as a Second Language. ESL is a perfectly valid definition and an ever-expanding field of education in the United States. In Vietnam, however, even getting the chance to participate in the English-speaking world moves you up an income bracket. Practicing English is confined to the two-hour extra class windows that one's family pays for to cram in all the irregularities in vocabulary, grammar, and speech of the language. Learning English, for many pupils, is forcing themselves to memorize words no one around them pronounce correctly, while learning at least eleven other subjects in grade school. Hosting extra school to teach English is such a lucrative field that it has been my backup plan for life since tenth grade. To illustrate, my ninth grade extra school teacher earns fifty times more than my engineer father, give or take.

I was very fortunate to have been guided to learn English since young.

I would rather kiss a dead person than hear you speak

