---
layout: post
title: "Neutral"
author: "Linh Le"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,random]

---
If I were still in high school, I would harp on the values of having middle ground. It is ingrained in the introductory level of English writing pedagogy: that one is supposed to argue for both <em>sides</em>, in doing so communicating a message of seasoned forethought that would inform the ultimate conclusion. High school (non-competitive, but also competitive) debate practices also love randomly assign people to affirmative or negative teams arbitrarily and vouch for the primacy of evidenced logos that speaks for itself more than you do. I am guilty of going a step further, opting for the conduit that congratulates the middle ground and preaches the harmonic futures of a united internationality. You know, people have good intentions but dissimilar bottom lines; there <em>has</em> to be a means of resolution.

But I am not in high school any more. I am way more cynical, differently esoteric, and not remotely as patient as I was before. The socio-politico-economic debates that I engage in become more complex, and the milquetoast synthesis in the majority of cases ends up encouraging a bothsidesism for want of bipartisanship, or social cohesion, or whatever constructed proximal metric of progress people conjure up when they run out of criticism. 

There are two parallel conversations at stake. The first one is ontological, consisting of three questions: (1) Is it possible to determine whether or not each and every problem has a definitively correct answer?, (2) If not, do the majority of problems have a definitively correct answer?, and (3) How is the correctness of the answer determined?

The second is political.

But I refuse to answer the ideological. Instead I plead to 

It is okay to not make up your mind.

Neutral is not independent