---
layout: post
title: "Chuyên Anh"
author: "Linh Le"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,vietnam]

---
My high school education is a topic that I am so far away from fully forgetting. It is a lifestyle, a generational affliction, that has suffused the condition of the modern Vietnamese youngster already so obsessed with academic prestige. I tell people that I am very grateful that vestiges of high school life were completely removed from my college experience, because if there were any semblance of Hanoi-Amsterdam at Yale I would have recoiled into a soullessly self-sabotaging persona that forced me to select what memories to preserve. The reality is that I could barely escape the scope of Hanoi-Amsterdam alumni network. Most Vietnamese Yalies were from my high school. Most of non-Yale people I know in New York or the Bay Area are from my high school. Every time I catch up with old friends is like binging a season of the Real Housewives franchise for students from Hanoi-Amsterdam. There is a thread of connection that invariably bound us together, much as I sought to sidestep it.

This time in Vietnam is the exam season, not just for finals. People in ninth grade have to test into high school regardless of their aspirations, but those wishing to enter the <em>specialized</em> schools have to study an extra subject. The word <em>chuyên</em> is hard to translate: it is close to some magnet high schools in New York, but it is like a major in college if anything. There is more stress to the high school entrance exam because you cannot retake it, unlike for college. Your <em>chuyên</em> subject will carry twice the weight in calculating your entrance score, and there are between 35 to 70 slots for people for each subject at my high school, and the 2023 signup reports indicate over 2100 students vying for a spot in the <em>chuyên Anh</em>, or English specialization, class. That is 1:30, consistently the most cutthroat class every year.

Hanoi-Amsterdam is not the only <em>chuyên</em> school (translated to "School for the Gifted") in Hanoi. There are three other schools that also accept <em>chuyên</em> students for all subjects, and four additional schools that are extensions of universities that specialize in broad subfields (a high school with only natural sciences subjects, one with only foreign languages, one that proclaims to support future teachers, and one with only humanities subjects). In fact, every provincial unit in Vietnam has at least one School for the Gifted. Ho Chi Minh City also has a similar structure and number of schools, with some arguably harder to get in than their Hanoi counterparts.

At this point you may ask, <em>what is the point of this system?</em>. It is fairly easy to explain for the natural sciences: they are prep classes for the international olympiads. Vietnam Ministry of Education coaches teams of 4-6 to attend the [IMO, IPhO, IChO, and IBO](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Science_Olympiad) every summer, and a series of regional to national competitions are hosted since the previous year's Fall term to find the most promising talents in each subject. <em>Chuyên</em> classes are the primary incubators for these students as they will focus a lot more on their specialization and have some of the regular duties in the 12 other concurrent subjects reduced. If selected to attend the national team, and even the international team, then the students get full time off regular school to focus on preparation. For subjects that are not Math, Physics, Chemistry, or Biology, the national competition would be the end of the journey. For <em>chuyên Anh</em>, there is a national English academic competition.

Amid the backdrop of plentiful magnet public high schools, my high school stands out for its unique history and reputation. Hanoi-Amsterdam was built as an ameliorative post-war project from the Dutch government, wherein in 1985 the best students from the neighboring provinces were picked to convene at my high school as its inaugural graduating class. The first generations of alumni are by design quite accomplished (one is a Math professor at Yale), but this paved the way for the 2000s generation as they were the first to apply to universities abroad based on merit. Previously, students studying abroad are said to do so because they lacked the grit to sit the Vietnamese university entrance exam. The presence of Vietnamese students at elite universities started to increase throughout late 2000s, but the majority were those already spending their 11th and 12th grade in Singaporean (or even American) high schools. These student-exchange sponsorships are still popular among Hanoi-Amsterdam students, as they are on average wealthier and more academically accomplished compared to their peers. Early 2010s saw the birth and proliferation of admissions consulting companies (mostly led by Hanoi-Amsterdam alumni) that established pipelines from my high school to every US elite university one could possibly think of. The English Class of 2011 had 3 Harvard admits, the most Vietnam has ever been represented. The English 1 class (of 40 students) had 4 UPenn admits last year. My friend at Yale jokingly asked a Vietnamese student if she went to Hanoi-Amsterdam, and unsurprisingly the answer was yes. She was also from the English 1 class.

There is a reason that my high school has, so far, stood out so strikingly. K-12 education in Vietnam does not support extracurricular activities, even suppressing it at times. My friend's brother who goes to a high-calibre non-magnet school in Hanoi has to pack his phone in an envelope as he enters school at 7AM every day, and schools can go until 4PM with a two-hour lunch break. Hanoi-Amsterdam, on the other hand, loves its student festivities. Ngày Hội Anh Tài is a six-month competition among <em>chuyên</em> classes that requires athletic preparation, fundraising, and live performances among all students. It frequently makes national headlines for its quality of organization as an entirely student-run, student-funded project, with people organized into special committees to handle stage equipment, corporate partnerships, and PR management. Ams' Got Talent and English Performance are two long-term projects run by the 11th-grade class of English 1 and English 2, respectively, with the former being both a talent show and a prom night and the latter a self-directed play that boasts budgets of fifty grand. My high school further benefits from a historical collaboration with the only United Nations International School outside of NYC, a five-hectare campus in the middle of Hanoi, and the meeting place for many children of the government's most powerful officials--there are about 40 clubs, four times higher than the school with the second most. And these, once again, have no involvement of teachers and administrators beyond signing permission forms. Even our graduation ceremony was organized by ourselves. Students leave high school with inflated GPAs, a wealth of extracurriculars, and amazing commands of English despite being public school students from Vietnam, making perfect candidates for college admissions looking for a holistically capable applicant with educational promise.

I have always taken a specific interest in the genealogy of <em>chuyên Anh</em> people and their journeys past high school, because so few of us major in English in college. It is actually so misleading to call it English because you would assume we studied English literature. But the substantial component of our <em>chuyên Anh</em> studies is regurgitating the same age-old idiomatic expressions that was most popular in late 19th-century Britain. It was so mechanical and devoid of context, yet still widely celebrated. I once visited a team in Hải Phòng the year they had the most first prizes in English; people were curating 500-page books full of [phrases and collocations](https://tailieudieuky.com/ebook/De_thi_OLYMPIC_30_thang_04_mon_Tieng_Anh_page=01), and actually memorizing the entire book within a semester. I bet if you ask any of them if they can dedicate the same amount of effort again, they will burst out in laughter.

This systematic absorption of a foreign language was why I felt so distinct about [TOEFL](https://lemanhlinh.com/journal/2022/08/16/toefl), or how I felt at an unfair advantage learning a new language. If anything, more <em>chuyên Anh</em> people should study Linguistics. But the majority of people in <em>chuyên Anh</em> that I know study Computer Science or Economics, Math or Studio Art, at best Political Science or Sociology. I know more biology PhDs from <em>chuyên Anh</em> class at my high school than eventual English majors. My homeroom teacher, whose recent comment on Facebook about the nature of <em>chuyên Anh</em> spurred on this piecee, said that the biggest advantage of getting into the English specialization class is that students learn other things more easily. That makes no sense, but somehow it is true. More than three quarters of the people from my class going to the US graduated with honors, and as far as I know two of them are college valedictorians. Yet if we were to say what we learned from high school teachers that helped us get here, a lot would struggle.

One possible explanation is the unintended perks of a selective yet lax education. The competitive nature of the entrance exams makes it so that after having crammed so much knowledge about the English language in preparation, any further tidbits about phrasal verbs or collocations yield diminishing returns. Those vying for a spot in the national team might try to brush up on the tricky questions, but, once a basis of somewhat advanced academic English proficiency is established, luck plays a more important role. While those in other specializations still have to spend the bulk of their time studying their subject, my class spends more time doing practice exams for the SATs, playing truant reading Murakami at Twitter Beans Coffee one block away, or (for me) watching Crash Course series on immunology in our own library. The system works: we still earn top prizes at the competitions we attend, and people study their own thing outside of the classroom. There is no incentive to improve, as the students continue racking the academic prizes, the flashy self-run events, and the elite college offers. This is how I managed to lead four different organizations in high school. I just had so much free time.

Over the course of <em>chuyên Anh</em> cohorts' history, there are a few updates and alterations to its exemplar. The stereotypical student is very sociable and dynamic, with professional interests that have diversified from education or business to astrophysics, engineering, studio arts, and photography. They spearhead activities like debate and Model UN, and never refrain from establishing local or national organizations to encourage social activism. They used to completely dominate national competitions and consider the First Prize as the holy grail of their education; now they treat the three-month preparation period as a free vacation from school to write college supplementary essays (while still having at least top 3 aggregate track record). They have big personalities that can sometimes be an entirely novel pedagogical experience for teachers; at the same times, they are teachers' pick because of relatively stress-free management. Since high school I have taken an anthropological interest in the generations of <em>chuyên Anh</em>, not just because they are names that I would see plastered over national news with a plethora of accomplishments, but also because the paths that people pursue deviant from the exact tests we all took are an enigma without a proper rationalization.

The Gifted School network is its own cult. Even before graduating from high school, I had already seen vestiges of this hyper-selectivity playing 

Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City further feature two middle schools that host exclusively <em>chuyên</em> classes to prepare for high school entrance exams. I am not well-versed in the HCMC ecosystem, but [Trần Đại Nghĩa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trần_Đại_Nghĩa_High_School_for_the_Gifted) basically mirrors Hanoi-Amsterdam in both middle and high school structure. In Hanoi, my middle school is treated as its own educational district in regional competitions (something like it would not be fair for us to take the seats of the actual district we are in). To get into Hanoi-Amsterdam middle school version you also have to take a test at the end of fifth grade, wherein the highest scorers would typically be familiar with basic number theory proofs and literary analyses. It makes sense that my middle school class takes up the majority of best scorers in the high school exams, and ends up taking several spots across the international science olympiad teams.
