---
layout: post
title: "Closure"
author: "Linh Le"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,random]

---
While the SVB-gate unfurled, I came across a very funnily relatable [tweet](https://twitter.com/_Zeets/status/1634621838742495232):

> You can take a poor kid out of poverty but you can’t take the anxiety of poverty out of the kid.

In all honesty my interests in most things financial are largely academic. Academics acknowledge that there is a trivial overlap between the study of economic science and the business of making money, and any fundamental curiosity about pecuniary distribution leans heavily towards the theoretical generalizable end of the spectrum. My ideal is to be concerned about money as minimally as possible, though for the time being it is more of a fantastical conception than a goal within grasp.

I always tell myself that I would rather my children not grow up poor. I think a childhood in poverty truly submerges you in a psychological vortex that consumes your life choices far beyond the poverty threshold. From a personal experience, I think being aware of my family's situations growing up has trained many of the behavioral traits I have today that I am thankful for, and I never felt like I was directly limited in my capacity to grow because I missed out on opportunities my parents could not afford. My intuition tells me that similar nurture can happen without the poverty mentality.

At an early age I just assumed that family could not afford things. This kickstarted when my parents reconstructed our shabby abode when I was 4 years old. Our old house was in an alley, in an alley, in an alley; it was so narrow that my neighbor and I could high-five from our room on our balconies. The old house was 40 meters squared with one bedroom; the entire commune actually shared a row of six public bathrooms at the entrance of our alley. Our new house was split into two, with my 