---
layout: post
title: "Sick"
author: "Linh Le"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,random,poem]

---
For a long time I did not know what it means<br>
to be homesick.<br>

I know what it means to be carsick<br>
Chained to cushion, afraid to motion<br>
as I fear another swerve would tumble my stomach.<br>
My eyes locked on the morning dew<br>
imprinted on the window<br>
as the hills of Lao Cai turn steeper.<br>
I clench my throat and pat my chest,<br>
my breaths heavier<br>
as if I could prevent myself<br>
from projectiling any moment further.<br>

I know what it means to be seasick<br>
Tracing the foam oscillating by the motors<br>
of a boat so far from land<br>
I retreat slowly inward<br>
fleeing the sight of waves hitting the flank of the deck<br>
They push and pull<br>
so out of tune<br>
and besiege me in ceaseless upheavals<br>
right within my own ear canals.<br>
I could not help but drown myself<br>
in water's violent flows<br>
and wish I was one with it.<br>

I know what it means to be airsick<br>
surrendering complete control<br>
to machinery once witchcraft.<br>
Who knows what it exactly is turbulent<br>
to know the rules of reality<br>
yet helplessly lost on its commanding chaos.<br>
No matter how many times I fly,<br>
knock myself unconscious,<br>
I still count down to when the wheels<br>
scratch the barren land<br>
to make sure I am still alive.<br>

I learned it is not hard to desist<br>
temptations of motion sickness<br>
Can I close my eyes<br>
and think of better days?<br>
of stopping the drive to the warmth surrounding Bắc Hà village<br>
of shiny stones surfacing sidewalks of beachside resorts<br>
of stratospheric quietudes undisturbed by self-imbued urgencies<br>
But what happens when<br>
the better days are when I am home<br>
Not home when I can be my true self<br>
but home when I am my innocent self<br>
Every night I play a cassette tape<br>
of discolored memories I remembered to record<br>
times I bought tofu from an unhygienic sky market<br>
or rode through potholes under torrential rain<br>
The truth is, home was rough<br>
its conventions and traditions and relations ridded with discomfort<br>
I struggled to ignore<br>
Hardly can I call it better<br>
than the journey I embarked on<br>
and the space it opens up.<br>

I am not even sure what it is I call home<br>
Is home my country? one whose history I claim no authority<br>
its sauces I barely tasted<br>
Is home my city? one whose fabric changes every day<br>
and familiar places effaced<br>
Is home my house? one whose chairs haved moved, tables turned,<br>
or clothes I wore no longer<br>
I thought I could close my eyes<br>
and transcend the confines of home<br>
But no fixation, recession, indisposition<br>
could help me escape.<br>

Recently I saw stories of friends<br>
maneuvering the labrynthine Phố Cổ<br>
laying sideways in an interprovincial motorcoach<br>
hopping around the railway tracks<br>
I paused my video call as they flick through polymer cash bills<br>
eating food trays on flimsy plastic chairs<br>
drawing hand fans in the sweltering heat<br>
I claim no experience Vietnamese<br>
nothing so unique<br>
but my envy was overwhelmed with joy<br>
and suddenly I feel<br>
homesick.<br>