---
layout: post
title: "Archived Post: Looking for collaboration on a project in Vietnam"
author: "Linh Le"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,vietnam]

---
TL;DR: If you are (1) currently based in Vietnam, (2) between the age of 16 and 24, (3) have some extra time from now until January, and (4) would like to work on a project about student research for Vietnamese students, please reach out to me.<br><br>

Perhaps one of the most riveting activities that I have had the luxury of enjoying from a U.S. tertiary education is conducting research.
It comes in many forms and across all disciplines, but it teaches rigorous, independent studies in a way that gives meaning to academic work.<br><br>

Contributing to state-of-the-art literature requires a lot of tools that only became available to me in college, but a lot of it is not college-level difficult.
Formulating research questions, coming up with testable hypotheses, and understanding methodologies are foundational skills that can help fortify the intensive Vietnamese high-school experience.<br><br>

I hope to initiate a project to teach theoretical, logical, and statistical know-how to a group of motivated high-schoolers, with a view to providing the groundwork for a publication-worthy long-term research project.
The most likely field of focus would be in the social sciences and humanities: think sociology, urban studies, and developmental economics. For now, I am less interested in potential scaling and more in gauging the maximal outcome of such an effort.<br><br>

I will be in Vietnam in January 2023. Please let me know if this is something you would consider being a part of, and/or any of your thoughts! The best way to reach me is via email (linh &lt; dot &gt; le &lt; at &gt; yale &lt; dot &gt; edu).